# Empirical analysis of an algorithms efficiency

After confirming theoretically that an algorithms effiency is acceptable, we
may still wnat to analyse it's behaviour in its intended environment. Doing 
this allows us to see whether the algorithm works worse than we expected or 
sometimes even better than what we expected.

There are seven steps typically taken when analysing an algorithms efficiency

**Step 1**  
The first step we take is understanding what the purpose of the experiment it.
Are we trying to:
- Check the accuracy of a theoretical assertion
- Compare the efficiency of several algorithms in solving the same problem
- Compare different implementations of the same algorithm
- Develop a hypothesis about an algorithms efficiency class
- Ascertain the efficiency of the program implenting the algorithm

**Step 2**  
The second step is to determine the efficiency metric to be measured and what unit
is to be used. There are two common efficiency metrics:
1. The number of times the algorithms basic operation is executed
2. The execution time of the algorithms implementation

**Step 3**  
The third step is to decide on the characteristics for the input sample. This
involves determining the problem size parameter(s) and then identifying the
basic operation and all instances of it.

**Step 4**  
The fourth step involves implementing and testing the algorithm within a program.
Start by choosing a programming language and implement the algorithm in it. Then
test to ensure none of the expected behavours have changed. 

It's important that the program counting the number of times the basic operation 
is performed and the program that is used to test the execution time are seperate.

A systems timer is typically not accurate, you will usually get different results
on repeated runs of the same program. This is why it's important to run the program
multiple times and take the average time of the recorded runs.

Sometimes, the running time of the algorithm may fail to register and report 0
because it's too fast. In instances like so, it's typical to run the algorithm
multiple times within a loop and divide the total time by the amount of repetitions.

**Step 5**  
The fifth step involves generating a series of sample inputs. If there are aleady
benchmarks that exist, you can use those. However, if there are none, then you will
need to make a few decisions:
1. What will be the range of input sizes
2. What will be the size of the sample inputs
3. How many times will each case need to be repeated

Depending on the use-case, it may be useful to develop a program which randomly
generates a sample of inputs.

**Step 6**  
Step six involves actually running the algorithm and recording the data observed.

**Step 7**  
The final step in this process is to analyse the data recorded in the previous step.
It's a good idea to present the data observed in both methods as each method
carries its own strengths and weaknesses.

There are a few ways that we can present the data to be analysed:
- Numerically within a table. Tabular presentations are good as they allow for 
easy data manipulation.
- Numerically within a graph, i.e. scatterplot
    - Scatterplots are a good way of showing the results as they allow for an easy
    visual assertion of the algorithms efficiency class

Let's see an example, imagine we ran some algorithm and recorded the following results.

| Size | Count |
|------|-------|
| 1000 | 11_966 |
| 2000 | 24_303 |
| 3000 | 39_992 |
| 4000 | 53_010 |
| 5000 | 67_272 |
| 6000 | 78_692 |
| 7000 | 91_274 |
| 8000 | 113_063 |
| 9000 | 129_799 |
| 10000 | 140_538 |

We could then analyse the data like so:

\\[
    \frac{t(10000)}{t(5000)} = \frac{140538}{67272} = 2.089 
\\]

\\[
    \frac{t(8000)}{t(4000)} = \frac{113063}{53010} = 2.133 
\\]

Observations:
- Since the ration of \\(t(2n) \\) and \\(t(n) \\) is greater than 2, we know
the algorithm is less efficient than \\(O(n) \\).
- Since the ration is less than 4, we know the algorithm is more efficient than
\\(O(n^2) \\).

Based off the two observations above, we can conclude that the efficiency class
is somewhere between \\(O(n) \\) and \\(O(n^2) \\). \\(O(n \log n) \\) is such an
efficiency class.

\\[
    \frac{t(2n)}{t(n)} = \frac{c(2n)}{cn} = 2
\\]

\\[
    \frac{t(2n)}{t(n)} = \frac{c(2n)^2}{cn^2} = \frac{4cn^2}{cn^2} = 4
\\]

We can then check the experimental results and confirm that the efficiency class
is \\(O(n \log n) \\).

\\[
    \frac{t(2n)}{t(n)} = \frac{(2n) \log (2n)}{n \log n} = \frac{2 \log (2n)}{\log n}
\\]
