# How to perform a theoretical analysis of algorithm efficiency

## What are the steps?
There are a series of steps we can take when attempting to perform a theoretical
analysis on some algorithm.

1. Plan out the parameter(s), characterising the size of input.
2. Identify the algorithms basic operation(s).
3. Setup a summation formula for the number of times the basic operation(s) are
performed in a worst-case scenario.
4. Solve the summation formula. This will result in either an exact equation or
an identification of the algorithms efficiency class in big-O notation.

## Step 1: What is the size of input?
The input size for the algorithm will depend on what data structures are involved.
For example, when dealing with compound data structures, the input size is usually
just the number of components involved:
- The number of tiems in an array
- The dimensions of a matrix
- The number of nodes or edges in a graph

Sometimes the input size of an algorithm is defined with two or more parameters.
- The two dimensions of a matrix
- The number of nodes and the number of edges in a graph

## Step 2: What are the basic operations required?
A basic operation is an operation that will have the most influence on the
algorithms total computation time:
- Key comparisons in a searching algorithm
- Numeric multiplications in a matrix multiplication algorithm
- Visits to nodes (or edges) in a graph traversal algorithm

An algorithm will usually have multiple basic operations throughout it's process.

## Example

```
ALGORITHM MaxMin2(A[0..n-1], Max, Min)
// Finds the maximum and minimum numbers in 
// an array A of n numbers, where n >= 1

Max <- A[0]
Min <- A[0]

for i <- 1 to n-1 do
    if A[i] > Max
        Max <- A[i]
    else
        if A[i] < Min
            Min <- A[i]
```

### Step 1: Find the input size  
Our input size for the algorithm would be the length of \\(A[0..n-1] \\). 
The size of \\(A \\) will change the amount of the time the algorithm will take 
to run. This is because the length essentially represent the amount of times 
the algorithm will need to iterate.

### Step 2: Find the basic operations  
The basic operations in this algorithm would be the two comparison statements:
- `if A[i] > Max` 
- `if A[i] < Min` 

This is because these operations will be performed most of the time during this
algorithm.

### Step 3: Create a summation formula
Putting this together we can say that the worst case scenario is when the first
array element \\(A[0] \\) contains the largest number in the array. This is
because it means the second `if` statement is always peformed.

In this situation, the basic operation is performed twice for each iteration
of the loop. Therefore the algorithms worst-case efficiency function is described
as:

\\[
C_{worst}(n) = \sum_{i=1}^{n-1} 2 = 2 \sum_{i=1}^{n-1} 1 = 2(n-1) = 2n - 2
\\]
