# Adjacency List

### Unweighted Undirected Graph
An adjacency list for an unweighted undirected graph of \\(N\\) vertices 
consists of \\(N\\) linked lists, each of which represents a vertex. The nodes
in the linked list represent those vertices that are adjacent to the vertex.

For example, some graph \\(G\\):
- \\(V = \\{A, B, C, D, E\\}\\)
- \\(E = \\{(A, B), (A, C), (A, D), (A, E), (B, C), (C, D), (D, E)\\}\\)

would be represented as an adjacency list like so:

```
A -> B: -> C: -> D: -> E:
B -> A: -> C:
C -> A: -> B: -> D:
D -> A: -> C: -> E:
E -> A: -> D:
```

### Weighted Undirected Graph
An adjacency list for an weighted undirected graph of \\(N\\) vertices 
consists of \\(N\\) linked lists, each of which represents a vertex. The nodes
in the linked list represent those vertices that are adjacent to the vertex.
Along with the nodes, an additional attribute is added representing the weight.

For example:
```
A -> B:3 -> C:6 -> D:7 -> E:4
B -> A:3 -> C:2
C -> A:6 -> B:2 -> D:1
D -> A:7 -> C:1 -> E:2
E -> A:4 -> D:2
```

### Unweighted Directed Graph
An adjacency list for an unweighted directed graph of \\(N\\) vertices 
consists of \\(N\\) linked lists, each of which represents a vertex. The nodes
in the linked list represent those vertices that there exists a directed edge 
from the vertex.

### Weighted Directed Graph
An adjacency list for an weighted directed graph of \\(N\\) vertices 
consists of \\(N\\) linked lists, each of which represents a vertex. The nodes
in the linked list represent those vertices that there exists a directed edge 
from the vertex. Along with the nodes, an additional attribute is added 
representing the weight.
